README.md, before:

# NFS Statistics Collector

## Overview
The NFS Statistics Collector utility is a lightweight process/application aware NFS
statistics collector. The tool is designed to track per-application NFS operations
and export the stats to various destinations (like prometheus, Vast Data native DB, local
log, etc).

## Features
- Packaging and distribution via DEB and RPM packages as well as a docker image.
- Flexible Data Storage: Includes drivers for exporting statistics to multiple destinations:
  - VDB: Vast Data native database solution.
  - Local log: Save statistics to local files for offline analysis.
  - Prometheus: Integrate with Prometheus for real-time metrics monitoring and alerting.
  - Console Output: Print statistics directly to the console.

- Testing and Deployment:
  - Provided Dockerfiles and Docker Compose scripts to facilitate easy testing and deployment in
    containerized environments.
- Package Building:
  - Improved the build process for generating DEB and RPM packages, ensuring smooth installation
    and management on various Linux distributions.


### Building Distribution Packages
To simplify the process of building distribution packages, use the provided Makefile, which
includes commands for generating DEB and RPM packages.
Follow the instructions below based on the package type you need to build.

General Prerequisites:
Make sure you have make installed. This is typically available by default on most Linux distributions.
In addition, python library build requires python3 build module:
```bash
pip3 install build
```

- DEB Packaging:

Install the necessary tools for building DEB packages:
```bash
sudo apt-get install build-essential debhelper dh-make
```
Navigate to the directory containing the Makefile and run:
```bash
make deb
```

- RPM Packaging:

Install the necessary tools for building RPM packages:
```bash
sudo dnf install rpm-build rpmlint
```
Navigate to the directory containing the Makefile and run:
```bash
make rpm
```
Build artifact will be located in the `dist` directory.

### Installation

<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; background-color: #fffadd; padding: 10px; margin: 10px 0;">
  <strong>Warning:</strong> 
Package requires python3.6 or above installed on the target system.

Additionally python executable should be presents as `python3` in the system
PATH. You can create alias `alias python3=python` before installation.
</div>

- For DEB Packages:
```bash
apt install ./dist/vnfs-collector_1.0.0-1_amd64.deb 
```

- For RPM Packages:
```bash
dnf install ./dist/vnfs-collector-1.0.0-1.noarch.rpm
```

Both packages install a basic console utility **vnfs-collector** which will be
added to the system PATH. This allows you to use the utility directly from the
command line.
```bash
vnfs-collector --help
```

Additionally:
- the **vnfs-collector** systemd service will be installed and enabled.
  The service configuration file can be found at `/etc/systemd/system/vnfs-collector.service`.
- the **vnfs-collector** configuration file will be placed at
  `/opt/vnfs-collector/nfsops.yaml`.
  This file contains the default configuration options for the utility.

systemd service can be started, stopped, and restarted using the following commands:
```bash
systemctl start vnfs-collector
systemctl stop vnfs-collector
systemctl restart vnfs-collector
```

Logs can be viewed using the following command:
```bash
journalctl -u vnfs-collector
```

### "Stand-alone" vnfs-collector Usage
<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; background-color: #fffadd; padding: 10px; margin: 10px 0;">
  <strong>Warning:</strong> 
Due to internal package requirements, the utility must be run exclusively as the root user.
</div>

The **vnfs-collector** utility can be used as a stand-alone tool without the
need for the systemd service. This can be useful for testing and debugging
purposes. Helpful information can be found by running:
```bash
vnfs-collector --help
```
Using help you can check all required and optional arguments of the utility.

At least one driver must be specified when running the utility.
For example, to output statistics to the console, use:
```bash
[sudo] vnfs-collector -d screen
```

To output statistics to a local file, use:
```bash
[sudo] vnfs-collector -d file --samples-path /path/to/logfile
```

All available options can be provided as command-line arguments or using
a configuration file:
```bash
[sudo] vnfs-collector -C /path/to/config/file
```
Configuration file example:
```yaml
interval: 5
vaccum: 600
screen: {}
file:
  samples_path: /opt/vnfs-collector/vnfs-collector.log
  max_backups: 5
  max_size_mb: 200
vdb:
  db_endpoint: <endpoint>
  db_access_key: <access_key>
  db_secret_key: <secret_key>
  db_bucket: <bucket>
  db_schema: <schema>
  db_table: <table>
prometheus:
  prom_exporter_host: 0.0.0.0
  prom_exporter_port: 9000
```

**screen**, **file**, **vdb**, **kafka** and **prometheus** are the names of
appropriate drivers.

Note: **screen** driver in this example is empty section:
```yaml
screen: {}
```
This key means that driver is enabled and uses default options.

### Docker Usage
The utility can be run in a Docker container using the provided Dockerfile.
This can be useful for testing and deployment in containerized environments.
##### Prerequisites:
- To build docker image you should have package distribution files in the `dist`
  directory.
##### Start debian based container:
```bash
docker build --build-arg="VERSION=$(cat version.txt)" -f docker/debian.Dockerfile -t vnfs-collector .
docker run \
  --privileged \
  --volume $(pwd):/opt/nfsops \
  --volume /lib/modules:/lib/modules:ro \
  --volume /usr/src:/usr/src:ro \
  --volume /sys/fs:/sys/fs:ro \
  --volume /sys/kernel:/sys/kernel:ro \
  --volume /proc:/proc:rw \
  --volume /host:/:ro \
  --name vnfs-collector \
  -t vnfs-collector \
  -C nfsops.yaml
```

Make sure you specified correct volume bindings:

| Mount                          | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Required |
|--------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|
| `$(pwd):/opt/nfsops`           | Binds the host working directory to the working directory of `vnfs-collector` within the Docker container. This is optional and is used if you want to pass full configuration from the host. CLI arguments can also be provided separately (e.g., `-envs "JOBID,MYENV" -interval 5`). | No       |
| `/lib/modules:/lib/modules:ro` | Required for kernel extensions.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Yes      |
| `/usr/src:/usr/src:ro`         | Required for kernel extensions.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Yes      |
| `/sys/fs:/sys/fs:ro`           | Required for tracking active mounts.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Yes      |
| `/sys/kernel:/sys/kernel:ro`   | Required for kernel extensions.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Yes      |
| `/proc:/proc:rw`               | Required only if the `--envs` CLI flag is provided. This binding allows `vnfs-collector` to access environment variables per process.                                                                                                                                                  | No       |
| `/host:/:ro`                   | Required for sys calls execution from host                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Yes      |


If you want docker container to start at system boot, use `--restart always`
or `--restart unless-stopped` option to `docker run` command.


### VNFS Collector DaemonSet
The VNFS Collector DaemonSet deploys a BPF application on all nodes in a Kubernetes cluster.
It collects networking and performance metrics from the host system.

Key Features
- Runs with host PID and IPC for deep integration with the host.
- Privileged mode with elevated permissions.
- Access to critical system directories mounted as read-only.
- Automatically uses the hostname of the node for context.
-
Usage
To deploy, apply the YAML configuration:

```bash
kubectl apply -f k8s/daemonset.yaml
```

Check the status with:

```bash
kubectl get ds vnfs-collector
```

To view the logs, use:

```bash
kubectl logs ds/vnfs-collector -f
```

<div style="border: 1px solid #002aff; background-color: #dde9ff; padding: 10px; margin: 10px 0;">
  <strong>Note:</strong> 
Adjust the configuration, which can be found in the 
ConfigMap located in the k8s/daemonset.yaml file, to suit your environment.
</div>


To get information about all available options use:
```bash
kubectl exec -it ds/vnfs-collector -- vnfs-collector --help
```

##### Access prometheus exported metrics:

Enable vnfs-collector built-in prometheus exporter by setting the exporter *local* address **prom_exporter_host**
and port **prom_exporter_port**.

In addition, the collector sampling is mandated by the *\<interval\>* argument, and prometheus metrics are buffered
(and merged if needed) between scraping periods. In order to have correlated scrapes, set the prometheus scrape
interval to match the collector *\<interval\>* argument.

To expose the metrics to Prometheus when deployed on k8s, you need to create a service.
The type of service you choose will depend on whether your Prometheus instance is running within the same cluster.
If Prometheus is in the same cluster, you can use a [Headless service](./k8s/service-headless-prom-exporter.yaml)

Complete setup can be achived by applying the following files
- [vnfs-collector daemonset](./k8s/daemonset.yaml)
- [vnfs-collector service](./k8s/service-headless-prom-exporter.yaml)
- [prometheus configuration](./k8s/prometheus.yaml)

to get into prometheus ui execute:
```bash
 kubectl port-forward svc/prometheus-service 9090:9090
```

and follow http://localhost:9090/


If Prometheus is running outside the cluster, you should use a [NodePort service type](./k8s/service-external-prom-exporter.yaml)

To check:
```bash
curl http://<node-ip>:30900/metrics
```

Commit message:

readme: update procedure to update vnfs collector daemonset
Simply document the procedure to rollout daemonset restart

Issue: https://git.vastdata.com/dev/vast-client-tools/-/issues/7

Signed-off-by: Sagi Grimberg <sagi@grimberg.me>

README.md, after:

# NFS Statistics Collector

## Overview
The NFS Statistics Collector utility is a lightweight process/application aware NFS
statistics collector. The tool is designed to track per-application NFS operations
and export the stats to various destinations (like prometheus, Vast Data native DB, local
log, etc).

## Features
- Packaging and distribution via DEB and RPM packages as well as a docker image.
- Flexible Data Storage: Includes drivers for exporting statistics to multiple destinations:
  - VDB: Vast Data native database solution.
  - Local log: Save statistics to local files for offline analysis.
  - Prometheus: Integrate with Prometheus for real-time metrics monitoring and alerting.
  - Console Output: Print statistics directly to the console.

- Testing and Deployment:
  - Provided Dockerfiles and Docker Compose scripts to facilitate easy testing and deployment in
    containerized environments.
- Package Building:
  - Improved the build process for generating DEB and RPM packages, ensuring smooth installation
    and management on various Linux distributions.


### Building Distribution Packages
To simplify the process of building distribution packages, use the provided Makefile, which
includes commands for generating DEB and RPM packages.
Follow the instructions below based on the package type you need to build.

General Prerequisites:
Make sure you have make installed. This is typically available by default on most Linux distributions.
In addition, python library build requires python3 build module:
```bash
pip3 install build
```

- DEB Packaging:

Install the necessary tools for building DEB packages:
```bash
sudo apt-get install build-essential debhelper dh-make
```
Navigate to the directory containing the Makefile and run:
```bash
make deb
```

- RPM Packaging:

Install the necessary tools for building RPM packages:
```bash
sudo dnf install rpm-build rpmlint
```
Navigate to the directory containing the Makefile and run:
```bash
make rpm
```
Build artifact will be located in the `dist` directory.

### Installation

<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; background-color: #fffadd; padding: 10px; margin: 10px 0;">
  <strong>Warning:</strong> 
Package requires python3.6 or above installed on the target system.

Additionally python executable should be presents as `python3` in the system
PATH. You can create alias `alias python3=python` before installation.
</div>

- For DEB Packages:
```bash
apt install ./dist/vnfs-collector_1.0.0-1_amd64.deb 
```

- For RPM Packages:
```bash
dnf install ./dist/vnfs-collector-1.0.0-1.noarch.rpm
```

Both packages install a basic console utility **vnfs-collector** which will be
added to the system PATH. This allows you to use the utility directly from the
command line.
```bash
vnfs-collector --help
```

Additionally:
- the **vnfs-collector** systemd service will be installed and enabled.
  The service configuration file can be found at `/etc/systemd/system/vnfs-collector.service`.
- the **vnfs-collector** configuration file will be placed at
  `/opt/vnfs-collector/nfsops.yaml`.
  This file contains the default configuration options for the utility.

systemd service can be started, stopped, and restarted using the following commands:
```bash
systemctl start vnfs-collector
systemctl stop vnfs-collector
systemctl restart vnfs-collector
```

Logs can be viewed using the following command:
```bash
journalctl -u vnfs-collector
```

### "Stand-alone" vnfs-collector Usage
<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; background-color: #fffadd; padding: 10px; margin: 10px 0;">
  <strong>Warning:</strong> 
Due to internal package requirements, the utility must be run exclusively as the root user.
</div>

The **vnfs-collector** utility can be used as a stand-alone tool without the
need for the systemd service. This can be useful for testing and debugging
purposes. Helpful information can be found by running:
```bash
vnfs-collector --help
```
Using help you can check all required and optional arguments of the utility.

At least one driver must be specified when running the utility.
For example, to output statistics to the console, use:
```bash
[sudo] vnfs-collector -d screen
```

To output statistics to a local file, use:
```bash
[sudo] vnfs-collector -d file --samples-path /path/to/logfile
```

All available options can be provided as command-line arguments or using
a configuration file:
```bash
[sudo] vnfs-collector -C /path/to/config/file
```
Configuration file example:
```yaml
interval: 5
vaccum: 600
screen: {}
file:
  samples_path: /opt/vnfs-collector/vnfs-collector.log
  max_backups: 5
  max_size_mb: 200
vdb:
  db_endpoint: <endpoint>
  db_access_key: <access_key>
  db_secret_key: <secret_key>
  db_bucket: <bucket>
  db_schema: <schema>
  db_table: <table>
prometheus:
  prom_exporter_host: 0.0.0.0
  prom_exporter_port: 9000
```

**screen**, **file**, **vdb**, **kafka** and **prometheus** are the names of
appropriate drivers.

Note: **screen** driver in this example is empty section:
```yaml
screen: {}
```
This key means that driver is enabled and uses default options.

### Docker Usage
The utility can be run in a Docker container using the provided Dockerfile.
This can be useful for testing and deployment in containerized environments.
##### Prerequisites:
- To build docker image you should have package distribution files in the `dist`
  directory.
##### Start debian based container:
```bash
docker build --build-arg="VERSION=$(cat version.txt)" -f docker/debian.Dockerfile -t vnfs-collector .
docker run \
  --privileged \
  --volume $(pwd):/opt/nfsops \
  --volume /lib/modules:/lib/modules:ro \
  --volume /usr/src:/usr/src:ro \
  --volume /sys/fs:/sys/fs:ro \
  --volume /sys/kernel:/sys/kernel:ro \
  --volume /proc:/proc:rw \
  --volume /host:/:ro \
  --name vnfs-collector \
  -t vnfs-collector \
  -C nfsops.yaml
```

Make sure you specified correct volume bindings:

| Mount                          | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Required |
|--------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|
| `$(pwd):/opt/nfsops`           | Binds the host working directory to the working directory of `vnfs-collector` within the Docker container. This is optional and is used if you want to pass full configuration from the host. CLI arguments can also be provided separately (e.g., `-envs "JOBID,MYENV" -interval 5`). | No       |
| `/lib/modules:/lib/modules:ro` | Required for kernel extensions.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Yes      |
| `/usr/src:/usr/src:ro`         | Required for kernel extensions.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Yes      |
| `/sys/fs:/sys/fs:ro`           | Required for tracking active mounts.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Yes      |
| `/sys/kernel:/sys/kernel:ro`   | Required for kernel extensions.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Yes      |
| `/proc:/proc:rw`               | Required only if the `--envs` CLI flag is provided. This binding allows `vnfs-collector` to access environment variables per process.                                                                                                                                                  | No       |
| `/host:/:ro`                   | Required for sys calls execution from host                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Yes      |


If you want docker container to start at system boot, use `--restart always`
or `--restart unless-stopped` option to `docker run` command.


### VNFS Collector DaemonSet
The VNFS Collector DaemonSet deploys a BPF application on all nodes in a Kubernetes cluster.
It collects networking and performance metrics from the host system.

Key Features
- Runs with host PID and IPC for deep integration with the host.
- Privileged mode with elevated permissions.
- Access to critical system directories mounted as read-only.
- Automatically uses the hostname of the node for context.
-
Usage
To deploy, apply the YAML configuration:

```bash
kubectl apply -f k8s/daemonset.yaml
```

Check the status with:

```bash
kubectl get ds vnfs-collector
```

To view the logs, use:

```bash
kubectl logs ds/vnfs-collector -f
```

<div style="border: 1px solid #002aff; background-color: #dde9ff; padding: 10px; margin: 10px 0;">
  <strong>Note:</strong> 
Adjust the configuration, which can be found in the 
ConfigMap located in the k8s/daemonset.yaml file, to suit your environment.
</div>


To get information about all available options use:
```bash
kubectl exec -it ds/vnfs-collector -- vnfs-collector --help
```

To update the and apply a modified [configuration configmap](./k8s/daemonset.yaml), restart the daemonset using:
```bash
kubectl rollout restart ds/vnfs-collector
```

You can watch the restart rollout progress using:
```bash
kubectl rollout status ds/vnfs-collector
```

##### Access prometheus exported metrics:

Enable vnfs-collector built-in prometheus exporter by setting the exporter *local* address **prom_exporter_host**
and port **prom_exporter_port**.

In addition, the collector sampling is mandated by the *\<interval\>* argument, and prometheus metrics are buffered
(and merged if needed) between scraping periods. In order to have correlated scrapes, set the prometheus scrape
interval to match the collector *\<interval\>* argument.

To expose the metrics to Prometheus when deployed on k8s, you need to create a service.
The type of service you choose will depend on whether your Prometheus instance is running within the same cluster.
If Prometheus is in the same cluster, you can use a [Headless service](./k8s/service-headless-prom-exporter.yaml)

Complete setup can be achived by applying the following files
- [vnfs-collector daemonset](./k8s/daemonset.yaml)
- [vnfs-collector service](./k8s/service-headless-prom-exporter.yaml)
- [prometheus configuration](./k8s/prometheus.yaml)

to get into prometheus ui execute:
```bash
 kubectl port-forward svc/prometheus-service 9090:9090
```

and follow http://localhost:9090/


If Prometheus is running outside the cluster, you should use a [NodePort service type](./k8s/service-external-prom-exporter.yaml)

To check:
```bash
curl http://<node-ip>:30900/metrics
```
